Document changed config entry state transitions (#2565)
home-assistant/developers.home-assistant: blog/2025-02-16-new-config-entry-states.md

---
author: Erik Montnemery
authorURL: https://github.com/emontnemery
title: "Changed config entry state transitions"
---

Config entry state transitions when unloading and removing entries has been modified:

> - A new state `ConfigEntryState.UNLOAD_IN_PROGRESS` is added, which is set before the integration's `async_unload_entry` is called
>   Rationale:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A new state `ConfigEntryState.UNLOAD_IN_PROGRESS` is added, which is set before the integration's `async_unload_entry` is called. Rationale:
```
"Rationale" is not rendered on a separate line, since this is a bullet point list

Author: I intended for the line break though. I've updated to add a `<br>` tag.

Reviewer: Oh yeah, `<br>` works too!

    - Make it easier to write cleanup code which should run after the last config entry has been unloaded
    - Improve debugging of issues related to reload and unload of config entries

> - The config entry state is set to `ConfigEntryState.FAILED_UNLOAD` when the integration's `async_unload_entry` returns False
>   Rationale: If `async_unload_entry`, we can't assume the integration is still loaded, most likely it has partially unloaded itself, especially considering this is the pattern we recommend:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The config entry state is set to `ConfigEntryState.FAILED_UNLOAD` when the integration's `async_unload_entry` returns False. Rationale:
    - If `async_unload_entry` fails, we can't assume the integration is still loaded, most likely it has partially unloaded itself, especially considering this is the pattern we recommend:
```

  ```py
  async def async_unload_entry(hass: HomeAssistant, entry: MyConfigEntry) -> bool:
    """Unload a config entry."""
    # async_unload_platforms returns False if at least one platform did not unload

>     if (unload_ok := await hass.config_entries.async_unload_platforms(entry, PLATFORMS))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    if (unload_ok := await hass.config_entries.async_unload_platforms(entry, PLATFORMS)):
```

        entry.runtime_data.listener()
    # Finish cleanup not related to platforms
    return unload_ok
    ```

> - The config entry is removed from `hass.config_entries` before calling the integration's `async_remove_entry` is called
>   Rationale:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The config entry is removed from `hass.config_entries` before the integration's `async_remove_entry` is called. Rationale:
```

    - Make it easier to write cleanup code which should run after the last config entry has been removed

Custom integration authors need to review and update their integrations' `async_unload_entry` and `async_remove_entry` if needed.
The most common pattern which requires an update is this:

```python
async def async_unload_entry(hass: HomeAssistant, entry: ConfigEntry) -> bool:
    """Unload a config entry."""
    loaded_entries = [
        entry
        for entry in hass.config_entries.async_entries(DOMAIN)

>         if entry.state == ConfigEntryState.LOADED

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        if entry.state is ConfigEntryState.LOADED
```

    ]
    if len(loaded_entries) == 1:
        # The last config entry is being unloaded, release shared resources, unregister services etc.
        ...
```

This can now be simplified, if the custom integration's minimum Home Assistant version is set to 2025.3.0:
```python
async def async_unload_entry(hass: HomeAssistant, entry: ConfigEntry) -> bool:
    """Unload a config entry."""
    if not hass.config_entries.async_loaded_entries(DOMAIN):
        # The last config entry is being unloaded, release shared resources, unregister services etc.
        ...
```

If the custom integration needs to be backwards compatible with previous releases of Home Assistant Core:
```python
async def async_unload_entry(hass: HomeAssistant, entry: ConfigEntry) -> bool:
    """Unload a config entry."""
    other_loaded_entries = [
        _entry
        for _entry in hass.config_entries.async_loaded_entries(DOMAIN)
        if _entry.entry_id != entry.entry_id
    ]
    if not other_loaded_entries:
        # The last config entry is being unloaded, release shared resources, unregister services etc.
        ...
```

> The [config entry documentation](/docs/config_entries_index) is updated.
> 
> The [home assistant core PR #138522](https://github.com/home-assistant/core/pull/138522) gives more background.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check the [config entry documentation](/docs/config_entries_index) to know more and the [home assistant core PR #138522](https://github.com/home-assistant/core/pull/138522) fore more background.
```
